This is an accepted version of this page

Adam's Peak is a 2,243-metre-tall (7,359-foot) conical sacred mountain located in central Sri Lanka. It is well known for the Sri Pada (IAST: Śrī Pāda; Sinhala: ශ්‍රී පාද, lit. 'sacred footprint'), a  1.8 m (5 ft 11 in) rock formation resembling a footprint near the summit whose name is also used for the mountain itself. In Buddhist tradition the print is held to be the footprint of the Buddha, later in Sri Lankan Hindu tradition that of Hanuman or Shiva (its Tamil name, சிவனொளிபாதமலை, Sivanolipaathamalai, means 'Mountain of Shiva's Light'), and in some Islamic and Christian traditions that of Adam or St. Thomas the Apostle.
The mountain is also known as Mount Malaya in Buddhist sources, particularly the Mahayana Lankavatara Sutra, which states that the Buddha preached this sutra on top of the mountain. According to this sutra, the mountain was the abode of Ravana, overlord of the Rakshasas and ruler of Lanka. Other names in Sanskrit sources include Mount Lanka, Ratnagiri ("Mountain of Gems"), Malayagiri and Mount Rohana.
The mountain is also seen as the abode of the deity Saman and also goes by various names associated with this, including Samanthakūta in Pali, and Samonalakanda ("Mountain of Saman").
The mountain is located in the southern reaches of the Central Highlands in the Ratnapura District and Nuwara Eliya District of the Sabaragamuwa Province and Central Province—lying about 40 km (25 mi) northeast of Ratnapura and 32 km (20 mi) southwest of Hatton. The surrounding region is largely forested hills with no mountain of comparable size nearby. The region along the mountain is a wildlife reserve, housing many species varying from elephants to leopards, and including many endemic species.
Adam's Peak is important as a watershed.  The districts to the south and the east of Adam's Peak yield precious stones—emeralds, rubies and sapphires, for which the island has been famous, and which earned for it the ancient name of Ratnadvipa.
